[Chapter 1 Branch](https://github.com/tme321/ng-DevelopingADataTable/tree/7a99229024d23f09f549d65edf6a691a415e7885)

[Next: Chapter 2. Testing the Datatable](/chapters/2._Testing_the_Datatable.md)

# Chapter 1
## Initial Datatable Design

The initial design is the simplest form of a datatable.

## The Selector

For a selector I have chosen to use an attribute on a table element.  

```ts
selector: 'table[app-datatable]'
```

Using an attribute selector is useful when the component represents functionality that is already semantic with HTML.  This way a developer can identify the higher level semantics and structure of a view without having to inspect the template of a particular component.

If the component were to represent more abstract functionality that doesn't map directly to HTML semantics I would have chosen a more descriptive root element but in this case I believe an attribute selector is easier to recognize.

The component class itself will be defined with a generic parameter.  This generic parameter will represent the shape of a single entry inside the rows of data that will be passed to the component.  I use a generic since the shape of the data will be unknown at design time.

```ts
export class DataTableComponent<T>
```

This also allows future development to provide correctly typed functionality back out to components that include this data table as part of their view.  They will be able to define a `ViewChild` where they can supply the generic as the type of data they are passing in to the datatable. 

## Columns

An array of column definitions will be provided to the datatable through an `Input` member.  The initial column definition consists of a `title` member that is the string displayed inside the `<td>`s of the `<thead>`'s single `<tr>`.  This string will be interpolated to the template directly so any valid `string` will be accepted.

A path is also needed.  A path represents the path on the row of data where the value can be accessed.  The path will be a `string` that will be used to index into the individual rows to extract the individual values of the datatable's `<tbody>`'s `<td>` cells.  In order to access deeply nested fields I will support paths specified as `.` separated key values.

The initial `Column` definition will be:

```ts
export interface Column {
    title: string;
    path: string;
}
```

#### Paths Example

Given a data set:

```ts
const data = [
    { 
        age: 26, 
        name: { 
            first: 'Bob', 
            last: 'Smith' 
        } 
    },
    { 
        age: 42, 
        name: { 
            first: 'Alice', 
            last: 'Long' 
        } 
    }];
```

The paths to access the 3 fields would be:

```ts
const agePath: 'age';
const firstNamePath: 'name.first';
const lasttNamePath: 'name.last';
```

## The @Inputs

Given the above information the datatable will accept 2 `Input`s: an array of the generic type `T` representing the rows of data to access and an array of `Column`s representing the structure of the table.

```ts
  @Input() columns: Column[];
  @Input() data: T[];
```

## Accessing the Row Values

Finally, the datatable needs a method to look up the values to display for each column given a `path` and `row` pair.  This function simply takes a single `row` of the data and a `path` selector and attempts to index into the `row` with the result of the `path` split on the `.` character.  If at any point the indexing fails I will default to simply the empty string, `''`, so that interpolation of the value will not fail and throw an error in cases where the `path` is incorrect or a particular `row` does not include the specified member.

```ts
getData(path: string, row: T) {
    return path.split('.').reduce((data,fragment)=>{
        if(data[fragment]) {
            return data[fragment];
        }
        else {
            return '';
        }
    },row);
}
```

## The Template

Given the above basic definitions the template is simply a matter of iterating over the `Input` bindings and calling back to the `getData` member to retreive the actual values for display.

```html
<thead>
    <tr>
        <th *ngFor="let column of columns">{{column.title}}</th>
    </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
    <tr *ngFor="let row of data">
        <td *ngFor="let column of columns">
            {{getData(column.path, row)}}
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
```
## The Controller

And the entire controller now looks like:

```ts
@Component({
  selector: 'table[app-datatable]',
  templateUrl: './data-table.component.html',
  styleUrls: ['./data-table.component.css'],
  changeDetection: ChangeDetectionStrategy.OnPush
})
export class DataTableComponent<T> {

  @Input() columns: Column[];
  @Input() data: T[];

  constructor() { }

  getData(path: string, row: T) {
    return path.split('.').reduce((data,fragment)=>{
      if(data[fragment]) {
        return data[fragment];
      }
      else {
        return '';
      }
    },row);
  }
}
```

This is now a working initial version of the datatable.  It doesn't have any complicated functionality and performance issues have not been considered at all at this stage.  But it accepts an array of `Column` definitions and `T` rows of data and renders a `<table>` element with the correct child elements and successfully labels the columns and extracts the values from the rows of data.

[Chapter 1 Branch](https://github.com/tme321/ng-DevelopingADataTable/tree/7a99229024d23f09f549d65edf6a691a415e7885)

[Next: Chapter 2. Testing the Datatable](/chapters/2._Testing_the_Datatable.md)
