[Chapter 4 Branch](https://github.com/tme321/ng-DevelopingADataTable/tree/773f051f97c2e4f45be6dd293e25b0c3d5894543)

[Previous: Chapter 3. Early Performance Considerations](/chapters/3._Early_Performance_Considerations.md)

[Next: Chapter 5.]()

# Chapter 4
## Row Selection

Initially row selection will simply be supported as an array of booleans.

```ts
selection: Array<boolean>;
```

This array can simply be reset whenever the data set changes; for now we will assume that selections don't persist across data changes.

Since selection happens by row I will also add in the event handler for clicking a row and bind a class to the selection flag.  This both gives me a visual hook with a css class and a code hook with the event callback.

```html
<tr [class.selected]="selection[r]" 
    *ngFor="let row of data; index as r; trackBy: rowTracker" 
    (click)="rowClicked(r)">
    <td *ngFor="let column of columns; trackBy: columnTracker">{{getData(column.path, row)}}</td>
</tr>     
```

```ts
rowClicked(index: number) {
    this.selection[index] = !this.selection[index];
}
```

And since the selection will reset on data change I now need to actually change the `data` `Input` to a setter and getter where I can also recreate the `selection` Array each time.

```ts
  private dataCache: T[] = [];
  selection: Array<boolean>;

  @Input() set data(data: T[]) {
    this.dataCache = data;
    this.selection = (new Array(this.dataCache.length)).fill(false);
  }

  get data() {
    return this.dataCache;
  }

```

With that set I can quickly test the selection process and...

## Why I set change detection to onPush early

This shows exactly why I set change detection to `onPush` at the very beginning.  None of this code is wrong, but I know that for performance reasons I want change detection to be `onPush`.  That means my above solution does not work as changing this `selection` array does not trigger a cd cycle.  

Now, as a quick and dirty version just to make sure it works I can add in a css style to show up when the selection is changed and inject the `ChangeDetectorRef` into the component and manually tell change detection something changed.

```css
tbody tr.selected {
    background-color: blue;
}
```

```ts
constructor(private cd: ChangeDetectorRef) { }

rowClicked(index: number) {
    this.selection[index] = !this.selection[index];
    this.cd.markForCheck();
}
```

As expected this shows everything working.  However, if possible I prefer not to be manually controlling the change detector.  There are some cases where it isn't avoidable, especially with regards to making some changes inside the init lifecycle callbacks, but I don't think this is one of those cases.

Thanks to setting change detection to `onPush` I am forced to handle this situation now instead of getting near the end of development and then decided to set `onPush` and having multiple points of breaking functionality.  I may have made development a bit more annoying upfront but in the long run have hopefully saved myself a lot of trouble.

## Changing selection to observables

After the very quick sanity check to make sure the basic idea is correct now I want to instead change the solution to a simple observable solution where I can use the `async` pipe to handle triggering change detection instead of doing it manually.

The quick version will just cache the selections made in the same `selection` member but will make a `BehaviorSubject` called `selection$` which can be used to emit each time it changes.  These changes make the code:

```html
<tr [class.selected]="(selection$ | async)[r]" 
    *ngFor="let row of data; index as r; trackBy: rowTracker" 
    (click)="rowClicked(r)">
    <td *ngFor="let column of columns; trackBy: columnTracker">{{getData(column.path, row)}}</td>
</tr>     
```

```ts
selection$ = new BehaviorSubject<Array<boolean>>([]);
selection: Array<boolean> = [];

@Input() set data(data: T[]) {
    this.dataCache = data;
    this.selection = (new Array(this.dataCache.length)).fill(false);
    this.selection$.next(this.selection);
}

rowClicked(index: number) {
    this.selection[index] = !this.selection[index];
    this.selection$.next([...this.selection]);
}
```

And now the initial selection feature works without manually triggering the change detector.

## A more detailed selection

The initial version of selection is lacking.  Most noticeably from an outside perspective it doesn't have any way to get either the selected rows as the array of booleans or as the rows of data they map to.

Further, only one mode of selection is currently supported and only one method of selection.  I would like to provide more flexibility for how selection actually works but even more so if possible I would like to allow the selection method to be extensible.  That way I can provide a few simple choices but also allow hooks for someone else to design a more complicated selection system if needed.

Finally, the initial obersvable version is fine for what it does but ideally I'd like to refine the process overall into more of a stream based method.

A lesson I have learned from designing and developing many components is components that work off of reactive streams tend to have the least buggy behaviors and the fewest performance issues.  I could write an article about the various reasons why this is the case but this insight has come through experience and is outside the scope of the development process of a single component.

So for the sake of this project I will simply make it a design goal.

#### New Design Goal

Make internal behavior of the datatable operate through rxjs streams as much possible.  This should both keep performance relatively high and reduce potential behavior bugs.

## Behavior as streams

Fundamentally, behaviors can often be thought of as discrete states.  Each possible event or change can trigger some sort of state change.  If this sounds familiar that's because it probably is.  This is the same basic patterns used by redux and it's offspring.  More specifically, since I am using rxjs then ngrx is the first place I can take inspiration from.

## Internal state as an internal store

At its root, ngrx's store implementation works off of the `scan` operator.  This operator is similar to `reduce` but where the rxjs version of `reduce` waits until the source completes to reduce the entire stream's emissions to a single value `scan` instead will emit each time its source does.  The value represents *the accumulation up to that point* as the source emits.

Since I want the state to change in incremental updates, rather than only update once on completion, `scan` is the perfect operator for this behavior.

To take another page out ngrx the interface with the selected state can be broken up into possible actions.  These actions can then map to possible mutations of the selections state.  This way I can easily tell where a particular mutation is coming from, depending on how fine grained I want to make the actions, and I can have a well defined interface where managing the state becomes as simple as dispatching new actions to the stream.

This method does end up being wordy similar to ngrx, but with a component that could end up with very complex functionality like a datatable it is a level of complexity I am willing to take on.  Here I am intentionally mimicing the style of ngrx very closely so that other developers can pick up on the pattern used and understand it quickly.  So an initial implementation of managing the selections like an ngrx store ends up with some standard looking boilerplate:

```ts
export enum SelectionActionTypes {
  InitSelections = 'Init Selections',
  SetSelections = 'Set Selections',
  ToggleSelection = 'Toggle Selection', 
}

export interface SelectionAction {
  payload?: any;
  readonly type: SelectionActionTypes;
}

export class InitSelections implements SelectionAction {
  readonly type = SelectionActionTypes.InitSelections;
}

export class SetSelections implements SelectionAction {
  readonly type = SelectionActionTypes.SetSelections;
  constructor(public payload: { selections: Array<boolean>}) {}
}

export class ToggleSelection implements SelectionAction {
  readonly type = SelectionActionTypes.ToggleSelection;
  constructor(public payload: { index: number }) {}
}

export class SetContiguous implements SelectionAction {
  readonly type = SelectionActionTypes.SetContiguous;
  constructor(public payload: { toIndex: number, prevIndex: number }) {}
}

export type SelectionActions = InitSelections | SetSelections | ToggleSelection | SetContiguous;

```

And the controller uses those definitions to implement a scan operation across a reducer.  Here I also use a tap to trigger some `Output`s so the selections can be used externally.  For now I have decided to emit the array of booleans as is and also the slice of data where the selection is true.  I may remove and or change these, but having the data available in different formats externally allows me to figure out what is actually useful later. 

```ts
selectionAction = new Subject<SelectionAction>();
selections$: Observable<Array<boolean>>;

@Output() selectionChanged = new EventEmitter<boolean[]>();
@Output() selectedDataChanged = new EventEmitter<T[]>();

@Input() set data(data: T[]) {
    this.dataCache = data;

    this.selectionAction.next(
        new SetSelections({
        selections: (new Array(data.length)).fill(false)
        }),
        tap(selections=>{
            this.selectionChanged.emit(selections);
            this.selectedDataChanged.emit(
                this.dataCache.filter((row: T,index: number)=>selections[index]));
        }));
}

constructor() {
    this.selections$ = this.selectionAction.pipe(
        startWith(new InitSelections()),
        scan(this.selectionsReducer, []));
}

selectionsReducer(selections:Array<boolean>, action: SelectionActions) {
    switch(action.type) {
        case SelectionActionTypes.InitSelections: {
            return [];
            break;
        }
        case SelectionActionTypes.SetSelections: { 
            return action.payload.selections;
            break;
        }
        case SelectionActionTypes.ToggleSelection: {
            const index = action.payload.index;
            const newSelections = [...selections]; 
            newSelections[index] = !newSelections[index];
            return newSelections;
            break;
        }
        case SelectionActionTypes.SetContiguous: {
            const min = Math.min(action.payload.prevIndex,action.payload.toIndex);
            const max = Math.max(action.payload.prevIndex,action.payload.toIndex);
            const newSelections = [...selections]; 
            for(let i=min;i<=max;i++) {
                newSelections[i] = true;
            }
            return newSelections;
            break;
        }
        default: {
            return selections;
        }
    }
}
```

And now I use the `async` pipe in the template that will trigger change detection automatically.

```html
<tr [class.selected]="(selections$ | async)[r]" 
    *ngFor="let row of data; index as r; trackBy: rowTracker" 
    (click)="rowClicked(r)">
    <td *ngFor="let column of columns; trackBy: columnTracker">
        {{getData(column.path, row)}}
    </td>
</tr>     
```

## Performance Issue

The above changes have created a rather large performance issue.  Making a new subsription for each `<tr>` with the `async` pipe is a noticeable performance killer.

The main accepted solution for this situation is to move the `async` pipe to an `ng-container` element's `ngIf` directive and export it with the `as` notation.  That would change my template to:

```html
<ng-container *ngIf="selections$ | async as selections">
    <tr [class.selected]="selections[r]" 
        *ngFor="let row of data; index as r; trackBy: rowTracker" 
        (click)="rowClicked($event,r)">
        <td *ngFor="let column of columns; trackBy: columnTracker">
            {{getData(column.path, row)}}
        </td>
    </tr>     
</ng-container>
```

While this method works it comes with a few drawbacks in this specific scenario.  First, this forces me to make sure `selections$` emits a truthy value.  An empty array is a truthy value and what I already have my datatable's selection initialized to.  But if I want to change that behavior later then that will result in the `<tr>`s not being added to the template anymore.

Furthermore, this template somehow implies that `selections$` is integral to the structure of the table.  I, however, consider the selections to really be a secondary, although important, behavior and not the primary purpose. 

Therefore, I have instead decided to add the `shareReplay` operator to the `selections$` stream.  This operator will ensure that the subscription will be multicast to all `async` calls which allows me to move the `selections$ | async` call back into the `<tr>` element and not have the selections pipe outside and controlling the body of the table.

Functionally, using either `shareReplay` or `as` with an `ngIf` should be identical.  In this case I think the `shareReplay` usage allows the template to convey what it is trying to accomplish better than a wrapping `ng-container`.

So implementing that changes the code to:

```ts
this.selections$ = this.selectionAction.pipe(
    startWith(new InitSelections()),
    scan(selectionReducer,[]),
    tap(selections=>{
        this.selectionChanged.emit(selections);
        this.selectedDataChanged.emit(
            this.dataCache.filter((row: T,index: number)=>selections[index]));
    }),
    shareReplay());
```

```html
<tbody>
  <tr [class.selected]="(selections$ | async)[r]" 
    *ngFor="let row of data; index as r; trackBy: rowTracker" 
    (click)="rowClicked($event,r)">
    <td *ngFor="let column of columns; trackBy: columnTracker">
      {{getData(column.path, row)}}
    </td>
  </tr>     
</tbody>
```

And that cleans up the performance issue introduced by the initial `selections$ | async` behavior. 

## Cleanup

Before this branch is committed I will do some quick cleanup moving the action types, actions, and reducer to separate files.  The datatable component itself is a little messy at the moment but as long as the code inside of the component belongs inside the component I can wait a bit longer before I tidy it up.  But moving the selection specific code to its own set of files means that the selections implementation won't distract me during further datatable development.

## Wrap up

This selection implementation supports selecting of multiple rows.  Each new row `click`ed is toggled selected or not.  If either the `ctrl` or `meta` key is held while `click`ing the entire contiguous area between the last `click` and the newest one will be selected.

Later I will probably tweak this behavior.  And I may even end up making it configurable.  But this basic interface gives me a good place to start.  And having abstracted the way selections are handled out of the actual datatable code means changing the behavior later should have a small impact on the datatable itself.


[Chapter 4 Branch](https://github.com/tme321/ng-DevelopingADataTable/tree/773f051f97c2e4f45be6dd293e25b0c3d5894543)

[Previous: Chapter 3. Early Performance Considerations](/chapters/3._Early_Performance_Considerations.md)

[Next: Chapter 5.]()