[Chapter 5 Branch](https://github.com/tme321/ng-DevelopingADataTable/tree/65958ee7ee9637a8fd8b5e8fb80063814345df89)

[Previous: Chapter 4. Row Selection](/chapters/4._Row_Selection.md)

[Next: Chapter 6. Dynamic Cells](/chapters/6._Dynamic_Cells.md)

# Chapter 5
## Updating Tests

Rerunning the existing tests gave 3 failures.

1.  DataTableComponent starts with no data - Expected false to be truthy.
1.  DataTableComponent can have columns set - Expected false to be truthy.
1.  DataTableComponent should render the table correctly. - Expected ' 1 ' to be '1'.

The first failure is simple and obvious.  The test was just verifying that the table started with no data but before it did that by checking the truthiness of the `data` member and expecting it to be falsey since it was unset.  Now that `data` is a setter I needed a caching member for the data and furthermore I would prefer if the table didn't throw null reference errors if no data was passed to it.  Therefore, the caching variable was initialized to the empty `Array` so I can just change the check from falsey to an `Array` of length 0.

The second failure is more complicated.  Before I was merely referring to the columns that were passed to the table directly, so a simple reference equality check verified that the columns were being set.

Now though, I am actually remapping the columns internally so that I can have a value to index them on.  In order to fix this error I just need to write a function that compares the columns passed with the columns actually in the table.

After writing a quick helper function, `areColumnsEqual`, the columns can once again be determined as being the same and so the test passes.  For now I'll just leave that function inside that testing file as that is the only place it is used.  But eventually I might move it out if the testing file becomes to large or I need the functionality elsewhere.

The third failure is just due to some whitespace modifications of the template resulting in a bit of padding inside the element's text field.  Since this doesn't effect the actual value on the dom it's just a simple matter of trimming the text string before comparing.

 With those small tweaks out of the way now I can get on to adding testing for the new functionality.

 The new functionality can be tested with just 2 test cases for the component.  
 
 The first is simply verifying that the row `trackBy` callback can be set.  This test is probably not necessary as it's basically just checking that Angular actually works like it's supposed to.  But as I mentioned in the first testing chapter it's easier to remove extra tests than it is to write all needed tests for a finished complex component.  So with that I add a simple check with a confirmation of the tests success in the callback as `'can set row tracker'`.

 The second new test case, `'will select a row on click callback and output the events'`, is verifying that the default selection routine works.  It simply triggers the various selection modes with click events and verifies that the `@Output` members emit the expected selection data.

 The selection reducer itself is tested in a more thorough manner but since it is following the basic redux pattern the reducer itself is a pure function which makes the testing relatively straight forward and simple.

 With that the testing is once again up to date.

[Chapter 5 Branch](https://github.com/tme321/ng-DevelopingADataTable/tree/65958ee7ee9637a8fd8b5e8fb80063814345df89)

[Previous: Chapter 4. Row Selection](/chapters/4._Row_Selection.md)

[Next: Chapter 6. Dynamic Cells](/chapters/6._Dynamic_Cells.md)
